# Exercise 12
## Threads

Reading: Chapter 9 of *Think OS* and Chapter 12 of *Head First C*.

### counter.c

1) In this directory you should find `counter.c`, a program that runs
multiple threads that increment a counter.  Read through the code and
make sure you understand it.

One of the functions in `counter.c` is `make_thread`, which
creates a new child thread.  One of its parameters, `entry`, is
a pointer to a function, so the syntax is a little complicated:

 ```C
    pthread_t make_thread(void *(*entry)(void *), Shared *shared)
    {
        int ret;
        pthread_t thread;

        ret = pthread_create (&thread, NULL, entry, (void *) shared);
        if (ret != 0) perror_exit ("pthread_create failed");
        return thread;
    }
 ```

If you are not sure about this type declaration, you can use
[cdecl.org](http://cdecl.org) to interpret it.


2) Use the Makefile to compile `counter.c` and run it.  Draw a thread
diagram that shows the interactions of the parent thread and the children.
Is the final value of the counter correct?

The final value of the counter was always correct.

3) Increase the number of children, then compile and run the program again.
Do you see evidence that the threads are running concurrently?  Do any
synchronization errors occur?

I increased the number of children to 50 and it was still pretty
consistently correct. After increasing it to 5000 it was regularly off
by some amount that was pretty inconsistent. It's clear they are running
concurrently because the value of the counter isn't always increasing as they
all print out and some of the increments are missed since the final counter
value isn't correct for increased numbers of children.


### counter_array.c

1) In this directory you should find `counter_array.c`, which is similar
to `counter`, but it uses an array to simulate a shared work queue.

The idea is that each element of the array represents a unit of work.
We want to run multiple threads to do the work, but we have to make sure
each unit of work gets done exactly once.

So we use a counter to keep track of the next unallocated unit of
work.  Each thread should check the counter to see which unit to
work on, do the work, and then increment one element of the array
to indicate that the unit is done.

If everything works correctly, each element of the array should be
incremented exactly once.  If there are synchronization errors, some
elements might be 0, or greater than 1.

Again, read through the program to be sure you understand it.

2) Use the Makefile to compile the program and run it.  Do any
syncronization errors occur?

Yes, in the 1,000,000 positions 120,224 were incorrect.

3) Also in this directory you should fine `mutex.c` and `mutex.h`, which
contain wrappers for the `pthread_mutex_t` structure provided by pthreads,
with a more object-oriented interface.

Make a copy of `counter_array.c` called `counter_array_mutex.c` and
add code that uses a `Mutex` to eliminate the synchronization errors.

Compile, run, and confirm that there are no errors now.

4) Synchronization takes some time.  Comment out the print statements
in `counter_array.c` and `counter_array_mutex.c`, then recompile and time them.

```
    time ./counter_array
    time ./counter_array_mutex
```

How much overhead does the synchronization impose?

Without synchronization:
real	0m0.057s
user	0m0.072s
sys	0m0.009s

With synchronization:
real	0m0.389s
user	0m0.522s
sys	0m0.225s



